---
name: "Phase Transition Thresholds for Generalized Goodstein Sequences, Hydra Games and Ackermannian Functions."
speakers:
  - "Gabriele Buriola"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '14:50'
time_end: '15:15'
talk_date: 2024-06-26
room: J431
---








We extend previous results [2] regarding the phase transition thresholds for Goodstein Sequences and Hydra Games to a more general setting. In both cases, we substitute the original successor function with the iterations of a strictly increasing primitive recursive function $$g$$ satisfying the condition $$g(x) \geq x+1$$; more precisely, the steps of the Hydra Game, originally of type $$\alpha_{f\!,i+1}= \alpha_{f\!,i}[1+f(i)]$$, are now of the form $$\alpha^{f\!,g}_{i+1}=\alpha^{f\!,g}_{i}[1+f(g^{i-1}(1))] $$, while the steps of Goodstein sequences are changed from $$m_{f\!,i+1}=m_{f\!,i}\left(1+f(i) \mapsto 1+f(i+1)\right) -1$$ to $$m^{f\!,g}_{i+1}=m^{f\!,g}_i\left(1+f(g^{i-1}(1)) \mapsto 1+f(g^{i}(1))\right) -1$$. The new phase transition thresholds incorporate the starting function $$g$$. These findings also allow a generalization of the phase transition threshold for Ackermannian functions [1] and fit within a rich literature regarding phase transitions in provability [3,4,5].


## Bibliography

1. E. Omri, A. Weiermann,_Classifying the phase transition threshold for Ackermannian functions_,**_Journal of Pure and Applied Logic_**,Vol. 158, (2009), pp. 156--162.
2. F. Meskens, A. Weiermann,_Classifying phase transition thresholds for Goodstein sequences and Hydra games_,**_Gentzen’s Centenary_**,Springer International Publishing, Cham, (2015), pp. 455--478.
3. L. Carlucci, G. Lee, A. Weiermann,_Sharp thresholds for hypergraph regressive Ramsey numbers_,**_Journal of combinatorial theory. Series A_**,Vol. 118(2), (2011), pp. 558--585.
4. M. De Smet, A. Weiermann,_Sharp Thresholds for a Phase Transition Related to Weakly Increasing Sequences_,**_Journal of logic and computation_**,Vol. 22(2), (2012), pp. 207--211.
5. L. Gordeev, A. Weiermann,_Phase transitions in Proof Theory_,**_Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science_**,(Proceedings), (2010), pp. 343--358.






