---
name: "Investigating uniform interpolation via global termination"
speakers:
  - "Valentina Trucco Dalmas"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '18:10'
time_end: '18:30'
talk_date: 2024-06-27
room: J222
---



A logic $$L$$ has the Uniform Interpolation Property (UIP) if for every formula $$\phi$$, and every propositional variable $$p$$, there exists a formula $$E p. \phi$$ built from variables in $$\phi$$ different from $$p$$, that satisfies $$\phi \to E p. \phi \in L$$ and that whenever $$\phi \to \psi \in L$$, we have $$E p. \phi \to \psi \in L$$ for all $$\psi$$ not containing $$p$$.
UIP can be interpreted as saying that the propositional quantifier $$\exists p$$ is definable.
In addition, UIP is a stronger version of the relatively better-understood Craig Interpolation Property.
Interpolation properties are highly correlated with the expressive power of a logic and have been studied for many logics, including many non-classical logics.

In 1992, Andrew Pitts [1] established that Intuitionistic Propositional Logic has the UIP using a proof-theoretic approach.
Pitts’ method crucially relies on a locally terminating proof calculus, i.e., a calculus where every rule’s premise is smaller than the conclusion w.r.t. some measure.
While Pitts' argument has been adapted to many non-classical logics, all of these arguments use a locally terminating proof calculus or rely on the ability of the logic to express fixpoints, such as in the case of the modal $$\mu$$-calculus.

In this investigation, we aim to isolate the global termination conditions under which a modified Pitts' method would remain applicable, to widen the scope of the proof-theoretic argument to non-classical ---and in particular, substructural--- logics.

This is joint work with Helle Hvid Hansen (Groningen) and Revantha Ramanayake (Groningen).

## Bibliography

1. Andrew M. Pitts,_On an Interpretation of Second Order Quantification in First Order Intuitionistic Propositional Logic_**_Journal of Symbolic Logic_**,vol. 57 (1992), no. 1, pp. 33--52.





