---
name: "Modeling hyperproperties for RFID systems"
speakers:
  - "Ludovico Fusco"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '14:50'
time_end: '15:15'
talk_date: 2024-06-28
room: J222
---

**Authors:** Alessandro Aldini and Ludovico Fusco


  



Since its official patenting in the 1980s, the Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID) technology has experienced relentless advancement due to its extreme versatility and usability in a wide range of contexts. Moreover, as an enabling technology for the IoT computing paradigm, RFID today underpins new tools for object identification/data acquisition in smart environments.

Although there have been many contributions to the formal description and verification of RFID-based systems and protocols, there has yet to be much progress toward an explicit modeling of information flow policies for RFID systems in terms of hyperproperties [1]. In this work, we initiate a taxonomy of hyperproperties for RFID systems, laying the foundation for a general framework for their formalization. To this end, we introduce a low-level, trace-based model suitable for representing RFID systems implementing tree protocols for tag collision arbitration [3]. Our model features a component-oriented, event-based notion of state allowing us to express hyperproperties in terms of event satisfaction by component configurations. 

In this context, we introduce and discuss three classes of hyperproperties for the analysis of tree-based anti-collision protocols for RFID tags: hyper-reachability, hyper-adaptivity, and generalized non-interference. For each of them, we provide a classical definition in the style of [1] and a formalization in a suitable hyperlogic [2]. Finally, we propose some insights about decidability issues.


## Bibliography

1. Clarkson, M.R., Schneider, F.B.,_Hyperproperties_,**_Journal of Computer Security_**,vol. XVIII (2010), no. VI, pp. 1157--1210.
2. Coenen, N., Finkbeiner, B., Hahn, C., Hofmann, J.,_The Hierarchy of Hyperlogics_,**_LICS '19: Proceedings of the 34th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science_**(Vancouver, Canada),article no. 39,2019,pp. 1--13.
3. Popovski, P.,_Tree-Based Anti-Collision Protocols for RFID Tags_,**_RFID Systems: Research Trends and Challenges_**(Miodrag Bolic, David Simplot-Ryl, and Ivan Stojmenovic, editors),Wiley,2010,pp. 203--229.




