---
name: "Local Basic Strategy Logic "
speakers:
  - "Valentin Goranko"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '14:25'
time_end: '14:50'
talk_date: 2024-06-28
room: J222
---








 Basic Strategy Logic (**BSL**) introduced in [1] is a minimal system of strategy logic of the type studied in [2]. **BSL**  builds on 
 a fixed set of agents $$\mathsf{Agt}$$  and on some (usually temporalized) language for expressing agents goals, such as **LTL**,  that defines a set of _goal formulae_ $$\Gamma$$ which are evaluated on plays in concurrent game models. 

The language of **BSL** extends $$\Gamma$$ with standard Boolean connectives and associates with each agent $$\mathsf{a} \in \mathsf{Agt}$$  a _strategy variable_, denoted by $$\mathsf{x}_{\mathsf{a}}$$. These variables range over strategies for the respective agents and can be quantified over within the formulae of **BSL**. 
Thus, **BSL** can be used for formalising the reasoning about strategic abilities of agents (players) and coalitions in concurrent multi-player games. It is shown in  [1] that **BSL** is sufficiently expressive to capture many naturally defined recently studied operators and logics for strategic abilities. 

In the present work I study its local version **LBSL**, which only involves in the language of $$\Gamma$$ the Nexttime temporal operator, referring to the immediate outcomes states from playing single-round concurrent games at the states of the model. I explore and characterise the expressiveness of  **LBSL**, study its validities, present an axiomatic system for them, and discuss the problems of its completeness and of the decidability of **LBSL**.  

## Bibliography









1. V. Goranko  Logics for Strategic Reasoning of Socially Interacting Rational Agents: An Overview and Perspectives.  **Logics**, vol. 1(1), 2023.    Online publication:  [https://www.mdpi.com/2813-0405/1/1/3](https://www.mdpi.com/2813-0405/1/1/3).
2. Fabio Mogavero, Aniello Murano, and Moshe Y. Vardi. Reasoning about strategies. In **Proc. of {FSTTCS} 2010**, volume 8 of **LIPIcs**, pages  133--144. 






