---
name: "Hypersequent calculi for propositional default logics"
speakers:
  - "Andrea Sabatini"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '14:50'
time_end: '15:15'
talk_date: 2024-06-28
room: J330
---








Default reasoning is a form of non-monotonic reasoning that allows  to draw plausible
conclusions under incomplete information and unless explicit evidence to the contrary: it can be formalized by extending classical logic with a collection of extra-logical axioms along with a set of **default rules**. 

Starting with Reiter’s seminal work, default logic’s formalism has been investigated through Hilbert-style calculi, semantic
tableaux and sequent calculi [1]. These proof-theoretic methods have undesirable features: (i) the proof-search space in Hilbert-style calculi is infinite;
(ii) in tableaux-based calculi, the information flow cannot be controlled at the local level;
(iii) sequent calculi rely on ad hoc
extensions of the underlying language. In this talk, we introduce a novel proof-theoretic approach to default propositional
logics which overcomes these drawbacks by means of a non-standard notion of **hypersequent**. 

We redefine hypersequents as hybrid constructs,
comprising sets of sequents and antisequents, and we depart from the conventional disjunctive
interpretation of the separating bar, embracing a conjunctive reading: antisequents are meant to furnish contrary updates concerning
the provability of the associated sequent. We employ these hybrid hypersequents to define specific extra-logical rules, which internalize within derivation trees the consistency checks involved in the application of default rules. As a result, we obtain a Gentzen-style formulation of defaults as
constrained instances of Strengthening – i.e., the inverse rule of Weakening [2].

On this basis, we design hybrid hypersequent HG4 calculi for default logics: we establish admissibility of structural rules, invertibility of logical rules and a weakened
version of the subformula property for cut-free proofs. We present HG4 calculi that are sound and (weakly) complete with respect to credulous consequence based
over Łukasiewicz extensions [3]. Moreover, we propose a hypersequent-based
decision procedure for skeptical consequence which relies on the **abductive** search
of counterexamples [5], thereby circumventing the need for early computation of all extensions.

We conclude with a brief discussion of HG4 calculi for credulous consequence based on Reiter extensions [6], as well as for exclusionary default reasoning [4].


## Bibliography



1. Bonatti P. A., Olivetti N.,_Sequent calculi for propositional nonmonotonic logics_,**_ACM Transactions on Computational Logic_**,vol. 3 (2002), no. 2, pp. 226-278.
2. Carnielli W. A., Pulcini G.,_Cut-elimination and deductive polarization in complementary classical logic_,**_Logic Journal of the IGPL_**,vol. 25 (2017), no. 3, pp. 273-282.
3. Lukasiewicz W.,_Considerations on default logic: an alternative approach_,**_Computational Intelligence_**,vol. 124 (1988), no. 1, pp. 1-16.
4. Horty J. F.,**_Reasons as defaults_**,Oxford University Press,2012.
5. Piazza M., Pulcini G. and Sabatini A.,_Abduction as deductive saturation: a proof-theoretic inquiry_,**_Journal of Philosophical Logic_**,vol. 52 (2023), pp. 1575-1602.
6. Reiter R.,_A logic for default reasoning_,**_Artificial Intelligence_**,vol. 13 (1980), no. 1-2, pp. 81-132.






