---
name: "Craig-Lyndon interpolation as cut-introduction"
speakers:
  - "Alexis Saurin"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '14:00'
time_end: '14:25'
talk_date: 2024-06-28
room: J335
---






After Craig's seminal results on interpolation theorem [1], a number and variety of proof-techniques, be they semantical or proof-theoretical, have been designed to prove interpolation theorems. Among them, Maheara's method [3] is specific due to its wide applicability to a range of logics admitting cut-free complete proof systems. 

We reconsider here Maehara's method and show how, by a close inspection of the proof, one can extract a "proof-relevant" interpolation theorem for first-order linear-logic  stated as follows: 
if $$\pi$$ is a cut-free proof of $$A \vdash B$$, we can find 
(i) a formula $$C$$ in the common vocabulary of $$A$$ and $$B$$ and 
(ii) proofs $$\pi_1$$ of $$A \vdash C$$ and $$\pi_2$$ of $$C \vdash B$$ 
the proof $$\pi'$$ obtained from $$\pi_1$$ and $$\pi_2$$ with a cut inference on $$C$$ cut-reduces $$\pi$$. 

We then show that this can be decomposed in two phases: (i) a bottom-up phase which decorates the sequents followed by (ii) a top down  phase which solves the interpolation problem, _synthesizing the interpolant by introducing cuts_. 


We then consider extensions of the approach to other settings (classical and intuitionistic logics, or the $$\mu$$-calculus) and discuss the computational content of the result which is related to a proof-relevant refinement of Prawitz' proof of the interpolation theorem [4] in natural deduction already investigated by Čubrić in the 90's [2] for the simply typed $$\lambda$$-calculus.


Details are provided in an extended version [5].


## Bibliography

























1. William Craig,_Three uses of the Herbrand-Gentzen theorem in relating model theory andproof theory_,**_Journal of Symbolic Logic_**,vol. 22(3) (1957), pp. 269--285.
2. Djordje Čubrić,_Results in categorical proof theory_,**_PhD thesis, McGill University_**,1993.
3. Shoji Maehara,_On the interpolation theorem of Craig_,**_Sûgaku_**, vol 12(4) 1960.
4. Dag Prawitz,**_Natural Deduction: A Proof-Theoretical Study_**,Dover Publications, Mineola, N.Y., 1965.
5. Alexis Saurin, **_Interpolation as cut introduction_**,draft, 2024, [www.irif.fr/_media/users/saurin/pub/interpolation_as_cut_introduction.pdf](www.irif.fr/_media/users/saurin/pub/interpolation_as_cut_introduction.pdf)






