---
name: "Modal logic semantics for ordinal analysis of bar induction"
speakers:
  - "Vlad Lazar"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '15:40'
time_end: '16:5'
talk_date: 2024-06-28
room: J335
---





There has been a notable increase in the utilization of provability logic within proof-theory, most of which is derived form Giorgi Japaridze's poly-modal logic (GLP) [2]. An interesting restriction of GLP called reflection calculus (RC) [3] was developed by Lev Beklemishev to facilitate the proof-theoretic analysis of PA. This method proved to be quite powerful, and has since been expanded upon.

Our work is primarily focused on an extension of reflection calculus called $$\omega$$RC, whose motivation comes from recent developments in ordinal analysis by iterated reflection principles [4]. The grammar of $$\omega$$RC is as follows: 

$$A:= p\;|\;\top\;|\;A\wedge B\;|\; \Diamond^1_{\alpha\geq 1} A\;|\;\Diamond^2_{\alpha\geq 2}\;|\; \downarrow A \text{ , where } \alpha\leq \omega.$$

Intended arithmetical interpretation:


  -  $$\top$$ is the system ACA$$_0$$.
  -  $$\Diamond^1_\alpha A$$ is ACA$$_0$$ + RFN$$_{\Pi^1_\alpha} (A)$$.
  -  $$\Diamond^2_\alpha A$$ is ACA$$_0$$ + $$\omega$$-RFN$$_{\Pi^1_\alpha} (A)$$.
  -  $$\downarrow A$$ is the theory:
    $$$$\{\varphi\in\Pi^1_\infty\;|\;A\vdash \forall M(M\models \varphi)\},$$$$

where M ranges over the countably coded $$\omega$$-models of ACA$$_0$$.

Given the equivalence between bar induction and $$\omega$$-model reflections [1], the aim of this modal logic is to aid in the proof-theoretic analysis of the theory of bar induction (BI). Our current results are on the semantic development of $$\omega$$RC. We have managed to prove Kripke-completeness for this logic, and are currently working on combinatorial techniques for analyzing the relationship between formulas.  



## Bibliography








1. Friedman, Harvey,_Some systems of second order arithmetic and their use_,**_Proceedings of the international congress of mathematicians (Vancouver, BC)_** (1975), pp. 235--242.
2. Japaridze, Giorgi K,_The polymodal logic of provability_,**_Intensional Logics and Logical Structure of Theories: Material from the fourth Soviet--Finnish Symposium on Logic, Telavi_** (1985), pp. 16--48.
3. Beklemishev, Lev,_Positive provability logic for uniform reflection principles_,**_Annals of Pure and Applied Logic_**,vol. 165 (2014), no. 1, pp. 82--105.
4. Pakhomov, Fedor and Walsh, James,_Reflection ranks and ordinal analysis_,**_The Journal of Symbolic Logic_**,vol. 86 (2021), no. 4, pp. 1350--1384.







