---
name: "Team semantics for modal mu-calculus"
speakers:
  - "Raúl Ruiz Mora"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '14:25'
time_end: '14:50'
talk_date: 2024-06-28
room: J336
---

**Authors:** Bahareh Afshari and Raúl Ruiz Mora










Team semantics can be seen as a generalisation of Tarskian model theoretic semantics originally developed by Hodges in [1]. In recent work, see e.g. [3], team semantics have been developed for LTL, CTL and CTL*. Also, team semantics have been defined and studied for modal logic [2] and first order logic giving rise to dependence logic, independence logic and inclusion logic [5].

We define a team semantics for modal mu-calculus, show it enjoys the flatness property and aligns well with existing team temporal logics. The approach taken utilises team semantics for modal logic and involves an algebraic study of powerset structures in order to assign a reasonable team semantics to fixed-points [4].

## Bibliography

1.  Hodges, W., _Compositional semantics for a language of imperfect information_. Logic Journal of the IGPL, **5(4)** (1997) pp. 539--563.
2. Kontinen, J., Müller, J. S., Schnoor, H., & Vollmer, H., _A van Benthem theorem for modal team semantics_. Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), 2014.
3. Krebs, A., Meier, A., & Virtema, J., _A team based variant of CTL_. 22nd International Symposium on Temporal Representation and Reasoning (TIME) (2015) pp. 140--149. IEEE.
4. Ruiz, R., _Team semantics for modal mu-calculus_. Master's thesis, University of Amsterdam, 2023.
5. Väänänen, J, _Dependence logic: a new approach to independence friendly logic_. London Mathematical Society student texts, **70**, Cambridge university Press (2007).


