---
name: "Coalgebra for non-wellfounded proof theory"
speakers:
  - "Borja Sierra Miranda"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '15:40'
time_end: '16:05'
talk_date: 2024-06-28
room: J336
---

**Authors:** Borja Sierra Miranda, Thomas Studer and Lukas Zenger






  Non-wellfounded proof theory results from allowing proofs of infinite height in proof theory.
    To guarantee that there is no vicious infinite reasoning, it is usual to add a constraint
    to the possible infinite paths appearing in a proof. Among these conditions, one of the 
    simplest is enforcing that any infinite path goes through the premise of a rule infinitely often.
    Systems of this kind appear for modal logics with conversely well-founded frame conditions like $$\textsf{GL}$$ (Gödel-Löb logic also known as provability logic) or $$\textsf{Grz}$$ (Grzegorczyk logic).
  
  We provide a uniform method to define proof translations for such systems, guaranteeing
  that the condition on infinite paths is preserved. In addition, as particular instances of our method,
  we establish cut-elimination for non-wellfounded systems of the logics $$\textsf{Grz}$$ and $$\textsf{wGrz}$$ (weak Grzegorczyk logic). 
  Our proof relies only on the categorical definition of corecursion via coalgebras, while an earlier proof
  by Savateev and Shamkanov uses ultrametric spaces and a corresponding fixed point theorem.

## Bibliography









1. Yury Savateev and Daniyar Shamkanov,_Non-Well-Founded Proofs Proofs for the Grzegorczyk Modal Logic_,**_The Review of Symbolic Logic_**,vol. 14 (2018), pp. 22--50.
2. \bysame,_Cut Elimination for the Weak Modal Grzegorczyk Logic via Non-well-Founded Proofs_,**_Logic, Language, Information, and Computation. WoLLIC 2019. Lecture Notes in Computer Science_**(Rosalie Iemhoff, Michael Moortgat and Ruy de Queiroz, editors),vol. 11541,Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,2019,pp. 569–-583.
3. Borja Sierra Miranda,_Cyclic Proofs for iGL via Corecursion_,to appear in **_Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science, Workshop on Fixed Points in Computer Science_** Open Publishing Association,2024.
4. Borja Sierra Miranda, Thomas Studer and Lukas Zenger,_Coalgebraic transformations of non-wellfounded proofs_to appear in arXiv.






