---
name: "Operational semantics for positive relevance logics"
speakers:
  - "Katalin Bimbo"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '16:55'
time_end: '17:20'
talk_date: 2024-06-25
room: J330
---






The relational semantics for relevance logics that was introduced by Meyer 
and Routley in the 1970s, utilizes a ternary relation, although it emerged 
from the idea of an operational semantics (cf. [2]).  A binary operation 
in place of the ternary relation provides a certain simplification; however, 
the set of prime filters (or prime theories) is not closed under the fusion 
operation.  For an informational interpretation of the semantics, it is 
desirable to use operations applicable to situations that have less structure
than prime theories have.  In this talk, I define an operational semantics 
for the main positive relevance logics $$\mathbf{T_+}$$, $$\mathbf{E_+}$$ and 
$$\mathbf{R_+}$$, that is, the positive fragments of the logics of ticket 
entailment, of entailment and of relevant implication.  The operational 
structure for these logics is based on pieces of information and it is 
augmented with a topology (which is similar to the topology used in [1]). 
The logics are proved to be sound and complete for these operational 
semantics.

## Bibliography


1. Bimb'o, Katalin,_Dual gaggle semantics for entailment_,**_Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic_**,vol. 50 (2009), no. 1, pp. 23--41.
2. Bimb'o, Katalin and J. Michael Dunn,_The emergence of set-theoretical semantics for relevance logicsaround 1970_,**_Proceedings of the Third Workshop, May 16--17, 2016,Edmonton, Canada_**,(Bimb\'o, K. and J. M. Dunn, editors),special issue of the **_IFCoLog Journal of Logics and theirApplications_**, vol. 4 (2017), no. 3, pp. 557--589.






