---
name: "Arbitrary Frege Arithmetic"
speakers:
  - "Ludovica Conti"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '14:00'
time_end: '14:25'
talk_date: 2024-06-28
room: J431
---






Abstractionist theories in philosophy of mathematics are systems composed by a logical theory augmented with an abstraction principle (AP), of the form: $$\forall X \forall Y (@X = @Y) \leftrightarrow E(X, Y)$$, originally proposed in order to pursue the Fregean project of a logicist foundation of arithmetic. 
 
In this talk, on the one side, I prove that, if we substitute the so-called Canonical interpretation function with an arbitrary one (cf. [2]), any consistent revision of the crucial axiom  BLV defines an extensional operator that is logical, namely weak invariant – i.e. an abstraction operator $$@_R$$ is Weakly Invariant iff, for any model $$\mathscr M=<\Delta, I>$$ and bijection $$i$$ of $$\Delta \to \Delta '$$, $$i(@^{\Delta}) =\{\langle i(X), i(y) \rangle | \langle X, y  \rangle \in @ \} = @^{\Delta'}$$, i.e. $$\forall X, \forall y$$ $$@(X)=y$$ if and only if $$@(i[X]) = i[y]$$. Furthermore, I prove that the main abstraction principle of Neologicism, Hume's Principle, satisfies the arbitrary version of other criteria, namely it turns out to be doubly internally invariant. (An abstraction operator $$@$$ is doubly invariant iff, for any model $$\mathscr M=<\Delta, I>$$
and permutations $$\pi_1, \pi_2$$ of $$\Delta$$, $$\forall X \in \Delta_2$$ (i.e. $$\wp(\Delta)$$), $$\forall y \in \Delta$$ $$@(X)=y$$ if and only if $$@(\pi_1[X]) = \pi_2[y]$$. An abstraction operator $$@$$ is internally invariant iff, for any model $$\mathscr M=<\Delta, I>$$ and one-one mapping $$f:X\cup \{y\} \to \Delta$$, $$\forall X, \forall y (@(X) =y)$$ if and only if $$@(f[X]) =  f[y]$$, i.e. $$f(@) = @$$)).


On the other side, I show that such an arbitrary interpretation allows us to identify a restriction of BLV (W-BLV: $$\forall F \forall G (\epsilon F = \epsilon G  \leftrightarrow \forall x (Fx \leftrightarrow Gx) \land \epsilon (\pi(F)) = \pi(\epsilon F))$$) that, if combined to the weakening of classical logical background in the (negative) free logical one, is able to precisely exclude the paradoxical concepts and, at the same time, to derive second-order Peano axioms. 
This means that this system – that we'll call Arbitrary Frege Arithmetic is able to recover both Frege's goals of  consistency and logicality.

## Bibliography

1.  Antonelli, G. A. (2010). Notions of invariance for abstraction principles. Philosophia Mathematica, 18(3), 276-292.
2.  Boccuni, F., Woods, J. (2018). Structuralist neologicism. Philosophia Mathematica, 28(3), 296-316.
3.  Cook, R. (2016).Abstraction and Four Kinds of Invariance (Or: What’s So Logical About Counting), Philosophia Mathematica, 25,1, 3–25.
4.  Fine, K. (2002). The limits of abstraction. Clarendon Press.
5.  Tarski, A. (1956). The concept of truth in formalized languages. Logic, semantics, metamathematics, 2(152-278), 7.



