---
name: "Scott ranks and intended models"
speakers:
  - "Dariusz Kalociński"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '17:45'
time_end: '18:10'
talk_date: 2024-06-28
room: J222
---







Certain mathematical theories are about a single, so-called intended, structure (e.g., arithmetic is about natural numbers) while others investigate general properties of all structures they axiomatize (e.g., group theory). The former theories are known as non-algebraic, while the latter as algebraic. One of the problems in the philosophy of mathematics concerns a systematic explanation of this phenomenon, ideally providing a theoretical notion that could explicate the concept of intendedness. I will briefly review some of the existing philosophical approaches regarding arithmetic, including the work of Halbach and Horsten [1], Button and Smith [2] and Walter Dean [3], among others. In the main part of my talk I will suggest a novel perspective on this problem, based on the measures of complexity of models, such as Scott ranks. I will try to explain basic technicalities involved in this notion and illustrate how it deals with the problem at hand with a few examples of algebraic as well as non-algebraic theories, including PA (by leveraging results from [4]) and weaker systems like Robinson's or Presburger's arithmetic.

## Bibliography









1. Volker Halbach and Leon Horsten,_Computational Structuralism_,**_Philosophia Mathematica_**,vol. 13 (2005), no. 2, pp. 174--186.
2. Tim Button and Peter Smith,_The philosophical significance of {Tennenbaum}'s theorem_,**_Philosophia Mathematica_**,vol. 20 (2012), no. 1, pp. 114--121.
3. Walter Dean,_Models and computability_,**_Philosophia Mathematica_**,vol. 22 (2014), no. 2, pp. 143--166.
4. Antonio Montalbán and Dino Rossegger,_The structural complexity of models of arithmetic_,**_The Journal of Symbolic Logic_**,(2023), pp. 1--17.






