---
name: "On non-essential expansions of quite o-minimal theories"
speakers:
  - "Beibut Kulpeshov"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '18:10'
time_end: '18:35'
talk_date: 2024-06-28
room: J222
---



 








The present lecture concerns the notion of _weak o-minimality_
originally studied by H.D. Macpherson, D. Marker and C. Steinhorn in  [1].
A _weakly o-minimal structure_
is a linearly ordered structure $$M=\langle M,=,<,\ldots
\rangle$$ such that any definable (with parameters) subset of $$M$$ is a finite union of convex sets in  $$M$$.

Quite o-minimal theories were introduced in [2]. Let $$T$$ be a weakly o-minimal theory, $$M\models T$$,
$$A\subseteq M$$,  $$p,q\in S_1(A)$$  non-algebraic. We say that $$p$$ is  _quite orthogonal_ to $$q$$
($$p\perp^q q$$) if there is no $$A$$--definable bijection $$f: p(M)\to q(M)$$.
We say that a weakly o-minimal theory is _quite o-minimal_  if the notions of
weak and quite orthogonality coincide for 1-types over arbitrary subsets of models of the given theory.




**Theorem.**
Let $$T$$ be a quite o-minimal Ehrenfeucht theory, $$M$$ be a countable saturated model of $$T$$.
Then for every $$n<\omega$$ and any $$\bar a=\langle a_1, \ldots, a_n\rangle \in M$$ the theory
$$T_1=Th(\langle M, \bar a\rangle)$$ also is quite o-minimal and Ehrenfeucht.
Moreover:

$$(1)$$ if each $$a_i$$ is a realization of an isolated or
quasirational 1-type over $$\emptyset$$ then $$I(T_1,\omega)=I(T,
\omega)$$;

$$(2)$$ if there exist $$1\le s\le n$$ and $$1\le i_1<i_2<\ldots
<i_s\le n$$ such that $$a_{i_t}$$ is a realization of an irrational
1-type $$p_{i_t}$$ over $$\emptyset$$ for each $$1\le t\le s$$ and the
remaining  $$a_w$$ (i.e. $$w\ne i_t$$ for each $$1\le t\le s$$) are
realizations of isolated or quasirational 1-types over $$\emptyset$$
then $$I(T_1, \omega)=6^{m_T-l}3^{k_T+2l}$$, where $$l=\dim\{p_{i_1},
p_{i_2}, \ldots, p_{i_s}\}$$.


This research has been funded by Science Committee of Ministry of
Science and Higher Education of the Republic of Kazakhstan (Grant
No. AP19674850), and in the framework of the State Contract of the
Sobolev Institute of Mathematics, Project No. FWNF-2022-0012.

## Bibliography





1. H.D. Macpherson, D. Marker, and C. Steinhorn,_shape Weaklyo-minimal structures and real closed fields_, **_shape Transactionsof the American Mathematical Society_**, Vol. 352, No. 12 (2000), pp. 5435--5483.
2. B.Sh. Kulpeshov, _shape Convexity rank and orthogonality in weakly o-minimaltheories_, **_shape News of the National Academy of Sciences of the Republic of Kazakhstan,physical and mathematical series_**, Vol. 227 (2003), pp. 26--31.






