---
name: "Informational presupposition in substructural inquisitive logics"
speakers:
  - "Vit Puncochar"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '17:45'
time_end: '18:10'
talk_date: 2024-06-28
room: J330
---





Inquisitive semantics is a framework that allows us to represent declarative propositions (statements) as well as inquisitive propositions (questions). In the basic inquisitive framework, every proposition is modelled as a set of sets of possible worlds that is (a) closed under subsets (intuitively: if an information state supports the proposition, every stronger state supports it as well), and (b) non-empty (it contains at least the empty set which represents an inconsistent body of information that supports every proposition). Declarative propositions can then be identified with powersets of a single set of worlds, and inquisitive propositions are just those that are not declarative, which captures an important feature of questions, namely that they cannot be characterized in terms of truth-conditions.

This framework naturally determines a modality that can be interpreted as informational presupposition. It reduces any question into the information presupposed by the question. The most straightforward example is that the question **whether A is true or B is true** presupposes the information **that A or B is true**. In the setting sketched above this modality transforms any proposition P into the powerset of the union of P. It is known that in the standard inquisitive logic this modality just coincides with double negation. In non-standard inquisitive logics (i.e. inquisitive logics based on non-classical logics of statements) this characterization is not possible. 

In my talk, I will provide a general logical analysis of this modality applicable to both the classical and non-classical case. I will use the notion of nucleus in a general algebraic characterization of this modality, which will be applicable to a large class of substructural inquisitive logics and I will show its connection to the so-called lax modality.
















