---
name: "Non-wellfounded parsimonious proofs  and  non-uniform complexity"
speakers:
  - "Gianluca Curzi"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '18:10'
time_end: '18:35'
talk_date: 2024-06-28
room: J335
---
















 Cyclic and non-wellfounded proof-theory has established itself as an ideal framework for studying (co)inductive reasoning, hence to express computationally (co)recursion mechanisms under the Curry-Howard correspondence paradigm. 
 
 In [3] the second author showed how  cyclic proofs can be employed in computational complexity, yielding an implicit characterisation of the polynomial time computable functions ($$\mathbf{FP}$$) inspired by Bellantoni and Cook’s algebra of safe recursion [2]. In a follow up paper [4], a characterisation of the class of functions computed by polynomial-size circuits ($$\mathbf{FP}/\mathsf{poly}$$) has been presented, where non-uniformity in complexity theory is modelled via non-wellfounded proofs. 

In this paper we investigate the complexity-theoretical aspects of cyclic and non-wellfounded proofs in the context of parsimonious logic, a variant of linear logic where the exponential modality ! is interpreted as a constructor for streams over finite data (see, e.g., [1]). We present non-wellfounded parsimonious proof systems capturing the classes $$\mathbf{FP}$$ and $$\mathbf{FP}/\mathsf{poly}$$, essentially restating the results in [1] for parsimonious logic to a non-wellfounded proof-theoretic setting. Soundness is established via a polynomial modulus of continuity for continuous cut-elimination. Completeness relies on an encoding of polynomial Turing machines with advice. 



## Bibliography








1. D. Mazza and K. Terui,_Parsimonious Types and Non-uniform Computation_,**_Automata, Languages, and Programming - 42nd International Colloquium,{ICALP}_**,vol. 9135,Springer, 2015,pp. 350--361.
2. S. Bellantoni and S. Cook,_A New Recursion-Theoretic Characterization of the Polytime Functions (Extended Abstract)_,**_Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing_**,Association for Computing Machinery, 1992,pp. 283--293.
3. G. Curzi andA. Das,_Cyclic Implicit Complexity_,**_Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science_**,Association for Computing Machinery,2022,pp. 1--13.
4. G. Curzi andA. Das,_Non-Uniform Complexity via Non-Wellfounded Proofs_,**_31st {EACSL} Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic, {CSL}_**vol. 252,Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum f{ü}r Informatik,2023,pp. 16:1--16:18.













