---
name: "Types of minimal numberings with hyperimmune oracles"
speakers:
  - "Assylbek Issakhov"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '17:20'
time_end: '17:45'
talk_date: 2024-06-28
room: J336
---

Let $$F$$ be a family of total functions which is computable by an oracle $$A$$, where $$A$$ is an arbitrary set. A numbering $$\alpha:\omega\mapsto \mathcal F$$ is called $$A$$-computable if the binary function $$\alpha(n)(x)$$ is $$A$$-computable, [1]. We call a numbering $$\alpha$$ decidable (resp., positive, and Friedberg) if equivalence relation $$\theta_{\alpha} = \{ (x,y) \mid \alpha (x) = \alpha (y) \}$$ is computable (resp.,  c.e., and  identity).

An infinite set $$A$$ is hyperimmune iff no recursive function majorizes $$A$$. A degree is called hyperimmune if it contains a hyperimmune set, otherwise it is hyperimmune free. Every nonzero degree comparable with $$0'$$ is hyperimmune.

In [2] it was proved that there is a c.e. noncomputable set $$B$$ such that $$B\leq_{T} A$$ iff for all families $$S$$ of sets, it is true that if $$S$$ has an $$A$$-computable Friedberg numbering, then $$S$$ has infinitely many positive non-decidable $$A$$-computable numberings.

It is known that if $$\mathcal F$$ is an infinite $$A$$-computable family of total functions, where $$A$$ is a hyperimmune set, then $$\mathcal F$$ has infinitely many pairwise nonequivalent $$A$$-computable Friedberg numberings, [3].

Let $$\mathcal F$$ be an infinite $$A$$-computable family of total functions, where $$A$$ is a hyperimmune set. Then

**Theorem.**
$$\mathcal F$$ has infinitely many pairwise nonequivalent positive non-decidable $$A$$-computable numberings.


**Theorem.**
$$\mathcal F$$ has infinitely many pairwise nonequivalent minimal non-positive $$A$$-computable numberings.


We know that if $$\mathcal F$$ is an infinite $$A$$-computable family of total functions, where $$\emptyset' \leq_{T} A$$, then the Rogers semilattice $$R_{A} (\mathcal F)$$ contains an ideal without minimal elements, [4]. Now we are interested in investigating such property for the case with hyperimmune oracles.


## Bibliography

1. S. A. Badaev, S. S. Goncharov, _Generalized computable universal numberings_, **_Algebra and Logic_**, vol. 53 (2014), no. 5, pp. 355--364.
2. F. Rakymzhankyzy, N.A. Bazhenov, A.A. Issakhov, B.S. Kalmurzayev, _Minimal generalized computable numberings and families of positive preorders_,**_Algebra and Logic_**, vol. 61 (2022), no. 3, pp. 188--206.
3. A. A. Issakhov, F. Rakymzhankyzy, _Hyperimmunity and $$A$$-computable numberings_,**_The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic_**, vol. 24 (2018), no. 2, pp. 248--249.
4. A. A. Issakhov, _Ideals without minimal elements in Rogers semilattices_,**_Algebra and Logic_**, vol. 54 (2015), no. 3, pp. 197--203.






