---
name: "Proof Mining and Probability Theory"
speakers:
  - "Nicholas Pischke"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '16:30'
time_end: '16:55'
talk_date: 2024-06-25
room: J335
---





On the surface, the theory of probability measures requires the use of proof-theoretically strong principles to already develop some of the most basic notions. Contrary to these apparent limitations, we present a recent approach for extending the program of proof mining to this area. This approach relies crucially on two main ingredients: (1) We identify the theory of probability contents (i.e. finitely additive $$[0,1]$$-valued functions defined on algebras of sets) as the mathematical finitary core of many arguments from probability theory and use this to initially define a suitable system for this proof-theoretically more accessible fragment. (2) Bootstrapped on this system, we employ intensional methods to deal with the high quantifier complexity of the predicates defining the other main objects of concern from probability theory, like e.g. infinite unions and Lebesgue integrals, etc. These systems are then amenable to proof mining metatheorems which guarantee the existence of (and provide a method for extracting) computable bounds for non-effectively proven existence statements. Further, for all these systems, we employ a novel extended notion of majorizability in the context of these metatheorems that guarantees that these extractable bounds are highly uniform regarding most parameters like e.g. the probability measure, the sample space and the event space, etc., and as such these metatheorems provide, for the first time, a logical explanation of the uniformities already observed in practice in the context of a few well-known ad hoc case studies preceding these metatheorems due to Avigad, Dean and Rute as well as Oliva and Arthan. This is joint work with Morenikeji Neri.

## Bibliography









1. M. Neri and N. Pischke,_Proof Mining and Probability Theory_,**_arXiv:2403.00659_**,(2024), 47pp.






