---
name: "Higher-order feedback computation"
speakers:
  - "Leonardo Pacheco"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '17:20'
time_end: '17:45'
talk_date: 2024-06-25
room: J431
---






Feedback Turing machines are Turing machines which can query a halting oracle $$h:\subseteq \omega\times\omega\to \{\downarrow,\uparrow\}$$, which has information on the convergence or divergence of **feedback** computations.
That is, given the code $$e$$ for a feedback Turing machine and an input $$n$$ the oracle $$h$$ answers if the computation $$\{e\}^h(n)$$ converges or diverges.
To avoid a contradiction by diagonalization, feedback Turing machines have two ways of not converging: they can diverge as standard Turing machines, or they can freeze.
A feedback Turing machine freezes when it asks the halting oracle $$h$$ about a pair $$\langle{e,n}\rangle$$ not in the domain of $$h$$.

Feedback Turing machines were first studied by Ackerman, Freer and Lubarsky [1,2].
They proved that the feedback computable sets are the $$\Delta^1_1$$ sets and the feedback semi-computable sets are the $$\Pi^1_1$$ sets.
We can also show that the feedback semi-computable sets are the winning regions of Gale--Stewart games with $$\Sigma^0_1$$ payoff [3].

A natural question to ask is: what about feedback Turing machines which can ask if computations of the same type converge, diverge, or freeze?
These new machines are second-order feedback machines.
Note that we must now have a new and stronger notion of freezing to avoid a contradiction by diagonalization.
Having defined second-order feedback computation, it is now natural to ask: what about third-, fourth-, and higher-order feedback?

We define $$\alpha$$th order feedback Turing machines for each computable ordinal $$\alpha$$.
We also describe feedback computable and semi-computable sets using inductive definitions and Gale--Stewart games.
Specifically, we prove the following level-by-level correspondence:  
**Theorem.**
    For all $$\alpha<\omega_1^\mathrm{ck}$$, the following classes coincide:
    
  -  the $$(\alpha+1)$$-feedback semi-computable sets;
  -  the sets definable by $$\alpha+1$$ simultaneous arithmetical inductive operators; and
  -  the sets of winning positions of Gale--Stewart games whose payoffs are differences of $$\alpha+1$$ many $$\Sigma^0_2$$ sets.
    


(This is joint work with Juan P. Aguilera and Robert S. Lubarsky.)

## Bibliography

1. Nathanael L. Ackerman and Cameron E. Freer and Robert S. Lubarsky,_Feedback Turing Computability, and Turing Computability as Feedback_,**_30th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science_**,(2015) pp. 523--534.
2. Nathanael L. Ackerman and Cameron E. Freer and Robert S. Lubarsky,_An Introduction to Feedback Turing Computability_,**_Journal of Logic and Computation_**,vol. 30 (2020), no. 1, pp. 27--60.
3. Yannis N. Moschovakis,_Descriptive Set Theory_,Mathematical surveys and monographs, vol. 155,American Mathematical Society,2009.






