---
name: "A parameterized family of decidable theories involving differentiable functions"
speakers:
  - "Gabriele Buriola"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '15:40'
time_end: '16:05'
talk_date: 2024-06-26
room: J330
---




















 We build on the existing literature on decidability in elementary analysis [2,3] by introducing a new family of decidable theories (Here the word 'theory' refers to a fragment of a logical language subject to strong syntactic restraints.) called $$\text{RDF}^n$$. These theories are parameterized by natural numbers and involve differentiable real functions of class $$C^n$$. By extending the previously developed theory $$\text{RDF}^{*}$$ [1], each $$\text{RDF}^n$$ is a quantifier-free first-order theory that includes numerical variables, basic arithmetic operations, function variables, and operators and relators for function addition, multiplication by a scalar, differentiation, function comparisons, strict and non-strict monotonicity / convexity / concavity, and comparisons between functions (and their derivatives up to $$n$$-th order) and real-valued terms. 
 The sentences constituting the $$\text{RDF}^n$$ language are (universally closed) propositional combinations of atomic formulas of the forms shown in the table: therein, the prefix '$$\text{S}\_$$' indicates strictness; $$\alpha$$ stands for an integer ranging from 1 to $$n$$ and $$D^\alpha$$ denotes the $$\alpha$$-th order derivative;  $$A$$ stands for an interval  specification; $$\bowtie$$ can be any of the relators $$=,<,>,\leq,\geq$$; $$s,t$$ stand for real-valued terms, and $$f,g$$ for terms designating functions in $$C^n$$. 
 
| $$s = t $$,                        | $$s > t $$,                            | $$f(s) = t $$,                           | $$ D^{\alpha}[f](s) = t $$,               |
| $$ (f=g)_A $$,                     | $$(f>g)_A $$,                          | $$ (f \bowtie t)_A $$,                   | $$ (D^{\alpha}[f] \bowtie t)_A  $$,       |
| $$\textit{Up}(f)_A$$,              | $$\textit{Down}(f)_A $$ ,              | $$\textit{Convex}(f)_A$$  ,              | $$\textit{Concave}(f)_A $$,               |
| $$ \textit{S}\_\textit{Up}(f)_A  $$, | $$  \textit{S}\_\textit{Down}(f)_A   $$ , | $$  \textit{S}\_\textit{Convex}(f)_A   $$, | $$  \textit{S}\_\textit{Concave}(f)_A  $$ , |


The decidability of these theories relies on the one hand on Tarski's celebrated theorem [6] concerning the decision problem for the algebra of real numbers and, on the other hand, on interpolation techniques. 
Our ultimate goal is to institute a uniform theory $$\textit{RDF}^{\infty}$$ encompassing $$C^{\infty}$$ functions.

Additionally, we explore the limits of decidability in the presence of a richer endowment of constructs relating derivatives and functions, e.g.,  equalities of the form $$\left( D^2[f]=g \right)_{\! A}$$, building upon the findings of Richardson [4] and subsequent improvements by Laczkovich [5].



## Bibliography

1. G. Buriola, D. Cantone, G. Cincotti, E. Omodeo, G. Spartà,_A decidable theory involving addition of differentiable real functions_,**_Theoretical Computer Science_**,vol. 940 (2023), pp. 124--148.
2. H. Friedman, 'A. Seress,_Decidability in elementary analysis, I_,**_Advances in Mathematics_**,vol. 76(1) (1989), pp. 94--115.
3. \bysame_Decidability in elementary analysis, II_,**_Advances in Mathematics_**,vol. 79(1) (1990), pp. 1--17.
4. D. Richardson,_Some undecidable problems involving elementary functions of a real variable_,**_Journal of Symbolic Logic_**,vol. 33(4) (1968), pp. 514--520.
5. M. Laczkovich,_The removal of $$pi$$ from some undecidable problems involving elementary functions_,**_Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society_**,vol. 131(7) (2002), pp. 2235--2240.
6. A. Tarski,_A decision method for elementary algebra and geometry_,Technical Report U.S. Air Force Project RAND R-109, Santa Monica, CA, 2nd revised edition, University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, iii+63 pp., 1951.






