---
name: "Comparison of hyperextensions of linear temporal logic"
speakers:
  - "Max Sandström"
categories:
  - Contributed Talk
hide_talk: true
time_start: '15:15'
time_end: '15:40'
talk_date: 2024-06-26
room: J336
---





























Linear temporal logic (LTL) is a modal logic with 
the modalities 'Next Step', 'Until' and
'Always Going to Be', 
and with linear orders as models, 
which are often called traces. 
LTL has the expressive power to capture some properties of
computation traces, but not all the properties of interest.
One class of properties beyond the scope of the logic
is characterised by the existence of dependencies 
between traces.
Properties of this kind are 
referred to as hyperproperties [1].
In this talk we compare the expressive power of
two approaches to extending
LTL in order to capture
hyperproperties.
We explore the relation between 
LTL under team semantics (TeamLTL) and 
LTL extended with trace quantifiers (HyperLTL),
with a focus on the effects of 
extending the logics with arbitrary disjunctions and 
negations has on the relative expressivity.
In the team semantics setting 
synchronicity brings with it great expressive power,
making the logic incomparable to HyperLTL,
whereas without the requirement of synchronicity 
the logic remains on the level of LTL [2].
Extending the asynchronous logic with connectives familiar from 
the team semantics literature, namely the Boolean disjunction
and Boolean negation, 
widens what can be characterised in the logic,
but how does the relation to HyperLTL fare in 
these extensions?

We will provide an overview of the results for
the synchronous semantics of TeamLTL, 
while elaborating further on our recent work [3] with 
the asynchronous semantics of TeamLTL.
In that domain we particularly consider 
the extensions of TeamLTL with
the Boolean disjunction and a so-called left-downward closed 
fragment of the extension of
TeamLTL with the Boolean negation, where the negation
cannot occur in the left-hand side of the 'Until'-operator or 
within the scope of the 'Always Going to Be'-operator.
We show that TeamLTL extended with 
the Boolean disjunction is equi-expressive with
the positive Boolean closure of HyperLTL restricted to 
one universal quantifier,
while the left-downward closed fragment of 
TeamLTL extended with the Boolean negation
is expressively equivalent with 
the Boolean closure of HyperLTL restricted to 
one universal quantifier.

This talk is based on joint work with 
Juha Kontinen and Jonni Virtema.

## Bibliography









1.     Michael R. Clarkson and               Fred B. Schneider,    _Hyperproperties_,    **_Journal of Computer Security_**,        vol. 18 (2010), no. 6, pp. 1157--1210.    
2.         Andreas Krebs and                  Arne Meier and                  Jonni Virtema and                  Martin Zimmermann,        _Team Semantics for the Specification                   and Verification of Hyperproperties_,        **_43rd International Symposium on                  Mathematical Foundations of Computer                  Science, MFCS 2018_**        (Liverpool, UK),        (Igor Potapov and                  Paul G. Spirakis and                  James Worrell, editors),        vol. 117,        Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik,        2018,        pp. 10:1--10:16.    
3.         Juha Kontinen and                  Max Sandström and                  Jonni Virtema,        _Set Semantics for Asynchronous TeamLTL:                   Expressivity and Complexity_,        **_48th International Symposium on                   Mathematical Foundations of Computer                  Science, MFCS 2023_**        (Bordeaux, France),        (Jérôme Leroux and                  Sylvain Lombardy and                  David Peleg, editors),        vol. 272,        Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik,        2023,        pp. 60:1--60:14.





